---
hide_table_of_contents: true
---
## 題目

Define the sequence if numbers $a_n$ by 

$$
a_0 = 1, a_1 = 1 + \frac{1}{1+a_0}, \cdots, a_n = 1 + \frac{1}{1+a_{n-1}}
$$

Show that $a_n$ is convergent sequence. Find the limit.

## 解答

Let $A_0 = a_0$ and $A_n= a_n - a_{n-1}$, then 

$$
\frac{A_n}{A_{n-1}} = \frac{-1}{(1+a_{n-1})(1+a_{n-2})}
$$

It's easy to see that $a_i\geq 1$, then $|A_n|\leq \frac{|A_{n-1}|}{4}$.

So $A_n$ is an alternating series with decreases monotonically and limit is 0.

By [alternating series test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternating_series_test), we have $a_n = \sum\limits_{i=0}^{n} A_n$ converges.

It's easy to check $\lim\limits_{n\to\infty}a_n = \sqrt{2}.$

----

### Harvard solution

First, note that $a_n$ is bounded below by $0$ and above by $2$ (a simple induction will prove these claims).

Now we consider the subsequences $a_{2n}$ and $a_{2n+1}$. We'll show the former is monotonically increasing and the latter is monotonically decreasing.

Note that 

$$
a_{n+1}-a_{n-1} = -\frac{a_{n} - a_{n-2}}{(1+a_n)(1+a_{n-2})} = \frac{a_{n-1} - a_{n-3}}{\text{something }>1}
$$

This shows $a_{n+1} - a_{n-1}$ hase the same sign as $a_{n-1} - a_{n-3}$ and $a_{n+1} - a_{n-1}, a_{n} - a_{n-2}$ have opposite signs.

Computing the first few terms, it follows that $a_{2n}$ is monotonically increasing while $a_{2n+1}$ is monotonically decreasing. Thus each of these subsequences converges, and they both obey the recurrence relation

$$
a_{n+1} = 1 + \frac{1}{2+\frac{1}{1+a_{n-1}}}
$$

Now that we have established that the subsequences converge, it makes sense to take limits of the above equation. Since both subsequences satisfy the same recurrence relation, they converge to the same value (so $a_n$ converges to this value).