## 題目

Let $n$ and $k$ be integers such that $n\geq 2$ and $1\leq k\leq n.$ Define 

$$
d_k(n)=\bigg\lvert{n\choose k}-{n\choose k-1}\bigg\rvert
$$

and 

$$
d_{\min}(n)=\min\{d_k(n)\mid 1\leq k\leq n\}.
$$ 

Prove that for $n$ different from $4$ and $6$, $d_k(n) = n-1$ if and only if $k=1$ or $k=n$.

## 解答(法1)

Only do $\implies$ part, the other is easy.

### Claim <1>

> If $n$ is even, say $n=2k$, and $n>6$, then $d_{k}(n)>1$.

**Proof:**

If not, then there exist some $k$ such that 

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\quad &\frac{(2k)!}{k!k!} - \frac{(2k)!}{(k+1)!(k-1)!} &= 1\\
&\Rightarrow &\frac{(2k)!}{k!(k-1)!} &= k(k+1)\\
&\Rightarrow &(2k)! &= k!(k+1)!\\
&\Rightarrow &\prod\limits_{i=1}^{k}(k+i) &= \prod\limits_{i=1}^{k}(1+i)
\end{aligned}
$$
        
, but $k > 1 \Rightarrow\!\Leftarrow.$

### Claim <2>

> For $n>6$, $d_k(n) > n-1$ where $1 < k \leq \lfloor\frac{n-1}{2}\rfloor$

**Proof:**

Use induction on $n$

1. $n=7$, easy
2. Suppose $n$ holds, then

$$
\begin{aligned}
d_k(n+1) &= {n+1 \choose k} - {n+1 \choose k-1}\\ 
&= \bigg( {n\choose k} + {n\choose k-1} \bigg) - \bigg( {n\choose k-1} + {n\choose k-2} \bigg)\\
&= \bigg( {n\choose k} - {n\choose k-1} \bigg) + \bigg( {n\choose k-1} - {n\choose k-2} \bigg)\\
&= d_{k}(n) + d_{k-1}(n) 
\end{aligned}
$$

If $1 < k \leq \lfloor\frac{n-1}{2}\rfloor$, by induction we have

$$
d_{k}(n+1) = d_{k}(n) + d_{k-1}(n) \geq 2(n-1) = n+(n-2) > n
$$

, the equality part is for $k=2$.

Otherwise, $\lfloor\frac{n-1}{2}\rfloor < k \leq\lfloor\frac{n}{2}\rfloor$, that means $n=2k$. Hence by induction and *claim <1>*, we have

$$
d_{k}(n+1) = d_{k}(n) + d_{k-1}(n) > 1 + n-1 = n.
$$

### Claim <3>

> If $$n$$ is even, say $$n=2k$$, and $$n>6$$, then $$d_{k}(n)\neq n-1$$.

**Proof:**

If not, then there exist some $k>3$ such that $d_{k}(n)=n-1$. Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\quad&\frac{(2k)!}{k!k!} - \frac{(2k)!}{(k+1)!(k-1)!} &= 2k-1\\
&\Rightarrow &\frac{(2k)!}{k!(k-1)!} &= (2k-1)k(k+1)\\
&\Rightarrow &2(2k-2)! &= (k+1)!(k-1)!\\
&\Rightarrow &\prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-2}(k+i) &= \prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-2}(3+i)
\end{aligned}
$$

, but $k > 3 \Rightarrow\!\Leftarrow.$

### Finally

By *claim <2>*, it's clearly that $d_{k}(n) > n-1$, whenever $n > 6$, for $\lceil\frac{n+1}{2}\rceil\leq k < n.$

Hence by *claim <2>* and *claim <3>* we have $$d_{k}(n) \neq n-1$$, whenever $n > 6$, and when n = $2,3,5$, it's easy to check that $d_k(n) = n-1$ only if $k=1$ or $k=n$.

## 解答(法2)

Suppose there exist $$k$$ is neither 1 nor $n$ s.t. $d_k(n)=n-1$, let $2\leq k \leq \frac{n}{2}$, then we can rewrite 

$$
d_k(n)=\frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!} - \frac{n!}{(k-1)!(n-k+1)!} = n-1
$$

as 

$$
\tag{⋆}(n-2k+1)\times n\times(n-2)! = (k!)\times(n-k+1)!
$$

### Case : k = 2

Then the equation $(\star)$ becomes $(n-3)n(n-2)! = 2!(n-1)!$, hence we have $n^2 - 5n + 2 = 0$. However the root $n$ is not an integer. $$\Rightarrow\!\Leftarrow$$

### Case : k = 3

Then the equation $(\star)$ becomes $(n-5)n(n-2)! = 3!(n-2)!$, hence we have $n=6$ is the only one positive solution. However $n\neq 6. \Rightarrow\!\Leftarrow$

### Case : k > 3 

Then the equation $(\star)$ becomes

$$
(n-2k+1)\times n\times\prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-4}(n-k+2+i) = 2k\times\prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-4}(3+i)
$$

Since $n\geq 2k$, then $n-2k+1\geq1,\; n-k+2\geq k+2>3$. So we have contradiction:

$$
(n-2k+1)\times n\times \prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-4}(n-k+2+i) > 1\times 2k \times \prod\limits_{i=0}^{k-4}(3+i)
$$

By all case above and symmetry we know it's true for $\frac{n}{2}+1 \leq k \leq n-1$.

And last case is that $k = \frac{n+1}{2}$. Since $k$ is integer, it means $n$ is odd, and $d_k(n) = 0$ by (b).

Hence $n$ different from $4$ and $6$, $d_k(n) = n-1$ if and only if $k =1$ or $k = n$.